https://real-faculty.wharton.upenn.edu/wp-content/uploads/~gyourko/WRLURI/GyourkoHartleyKrimmel_NBERw26573.pdf

1) Local Political Pressure Index (LPPI)
This subindex quantifies the degree to which various actors are involved in the local
residential development process. The underlying data largely come from responses to Question
3 on our survey, which asks the following: “In your community, how involved are the following
in affecting residential building activities and/or growth management procedures?” Respondents
then rate the importance of various actors—such as a local council or managers, local
community pressure or other listed entity--on a 1 to 5 scale, with 1 indicating the actors have no
involvement and 5 indicating they are “Very Involved.” To these scores, we add the number of
land preservation and conservation-related ballot initiatives approved by the municipality
between 2008 and August 2018. The ballot initiatives measure is based on the Trust for Public
Land Landvote database.6
Scores are summed as follows:
(1) LPPI = LocalCouncil + Community Pressure + Other + BallotInitiatives

2. State Political Involvement Index (SPII)
The State Political Involvement Index (SPII) is based on the answer to a single question
asking how involved is the state legislature in influencing residential building activities and/or
growth management procedures. Thus,
(2) SPII = StateLeg.
Because this is a component of Question 3 described above with respect to the LPPI, its answers
also range from 1 (no involvement) to 5 (very involved).

3. Court Involvement Index (CII)
This is the final index regarding the actors involved in the local residential land use
process. The CII is the sum of the reported local and state courts’ involvement in affecting
residential building activities and/or growth management (the sums of questions 3d and 3e,
respectively). That is,
(3) CII = LocalCourt + StateCourt.
The potential range of values is from 2-10, with a value of two indicating that both local and
state courts are not at all involved in the regulatory process, and a score of ten indicating that
they are heavily involved. As with the first two subindexes, a higher degree of court
involvement does not necessarily imply they are trying to make the local regulatory environment
11
more restrictive. Increased court involvement could arise from a desire to lighten the regulatory
burden or re-zone municipalities for higher density. That said, Ganong and Shoag’s (2017)
measure of land use regulations, which counted the number of land use legal cases by state, was
strongly positively correlated with the WRLURI2006 index, so more court involvement well
may be indicative of a more restrictive regulatory environment.

4. Local Project Approval Index (LPAI)
Question 4 of our survey asks for a different type of information on the process of
regulatory control—namely, who must approve different types of projects before they can be
built and whether approval requires a supermajority vote in favor. This subindex pertains to
projects that do not require any variance to the current zoning code (i.e., they are ‘by right’
because they do not violate any current rule or law).
The question asks which of nine entities have to approve a project before any housing can
be built. Eight specific entities listed include: the local planning commission; local zoning
board; local council, managers, or commissioners; the county board of commissioners; the
county zoning board; an environmental review board; a public health office; or a design review
board; the ninth is ‘Other’ in case there is another group we did not list that is relevant.7 Thus,
(4) LPAI = LocalPlan + LocZone + LocCouncil + CountyComm + CountyZone + Environ
+ PubHealth + Design + Other.
Response values for each entity range from 0-2. A zero indicates the entity does not have
to approve the project. A value of one indicates that the entity does have to approve, but may do
so by a simple majority vote. A value of 2 indicates that the entity must not only formally
approve the project, but must do so by a supermajority vote of its decision makers. Hence, the possible range of values for this index runs from 0-18. A value of zero indicates that there is no
entity required to approve a ‘by right’ project, while a value of 18 would indicate that each of the
eight listed entities, plus another listed by the respondent, must approve with a supermajority in
favor.

6. Local Assembly Index (LAI)
The LAI uses the final piece of data generated from Question 4. That question also asks
whether a town meeting is required to approve any type of proposed residential project. Rather
than include this information as a component of the LPAI and LZAI indexes just described, we
use it to create a separate index to capture whether the local regulatory environment requires
some type of direct democracy involvement of the local population. Thus,
(6) LAI = TownMeet,
with the index values ranging from 0-2.

7. Supply Restrictions Index (SRI)
The Supply Restrictions Index reflects the extent to which there are explicit annual caps
on the supply of new housing. Question 8 of the survey asks whether (in a simple ‘yes or no’
sense) the respondent community places annual limits on the total allowable number of permitted
units, total number units constructed, units per dwelling or the aggregate number of buildings
constructed. More specifically, the question asks whether there are limits for the following:
building permits for single family homes or multifamily units; the number of single family
homes or multifamily units authorized for construction; the number of multifamily units
buildings authorized for construction; and the number of units in multifamily dwellings. The
SRI is the simple sum of the number of limits on building permits, construction, or number of
dwellings and units and is constructed as follows:
(7) SRI = SFPermits + MFPermits + SFConst + MFConst + MFBuild + MFUnitsDwell.
Hence, its value ranges from a low of zero to a high of six.

8. Density Restriction Index (DRI)
One way to constrain housing supply is to impose density restrictions. Question 7 of the
survey asks whether the community has any minimum lot size requirement at all, and if so, the
size of the largest minimum required in any neighborhood within the jurisdiction. Specifically,
respondents were asked to indicate whether their largest minimum required that homes be built
on less than one-half acre of land, from 0.5-1.0 acres, from 1-2 acres or from 2+ acres.
The DRI subindex takes on values ranging from 0-4 and is constructed as follows:
(8) DRI = 0 if there is no minimum lot size regulation anywhere in the jurisdiction
= 1 if there is a minimum, but it is no larger than 0.5 acres
= 2 if there is a minimum, and the largest one is from 0.5-1.0 acres
= 3 if there is a minimum, and the largest one is from 1.0-2.0 acres
= 4, if there is a minimum, and the largest one is for more than 2 acres.

9. Open Space Index (OSI)
Question 9 of the survey asks about different types of regulations that communities might
impose on developers in return for the right to build. One is whether residential real estate
developers are required to provide some type of space for the community to use (or pay a fee in
lieu of providing such space). This could reflect an explicit open space requirement or some
mandate that space be provided for a specific community use. For simplicity, we call this the
Open Space Index, with OSI measured as 0-1 dummy where a value of one indicates that some
type of dedicated space is required to be provided (or a financially equivalent fee paid). Thus,
(9) OSI = 1 if some type of mandatory space provision is required; =0 otherwise.

10. Exactions Index (EI)
Question 9 also asked whether the community required developers to pay any type of
impact fee or the allocable share of the costs of infrastructure. The EI also is a 0-1 variable and
is measured as follows:
(10) EI = 1 if an impact fee exists and =0 otherwise.

11. Affordable Housing Index (AHI)
The final component to Question 9 asks whether developers were required to “Include
affordable housing, however defined, in their projects” in order to be able to build in the
jurisdiction. We interpret an answer in the affirmative to indicate that there exists some
affordable housing requirement in the municipality. This also is a 0-1 variable such that
(11) AHI = 1 an affordable housing program exists and =0 if not.

12. Approval Delay Index (ADI)
The final subindex used in creating our aggregate index is a measure of permit approval
delay. The survey asks about project review time in several places (including questions 16, 17,
18, 20, and 22). The Approval Delay Index (ADI) combines the average review time for 15
residential projects, rezoning requests involving multiple unit types and subdivision requests into
a single metric. The ADI is calculated in several steps. First, we compute the simple averages of
review time (reported in months) for:
(1) by-right single-family unit projects and by-right multifamily unit projects
((sfprojrev + mfprojrev)/2) from Questions 16a and 16b);
(2) not by-right single-family unit projects and not by-right multifamily unit projects
((nsfprojrev + nmfprojrev)/2) from Questions 17a and 17b);
(3) application for and issuance of a building permit for development of less than 50
single-family units, 50 or more single-family units, and multi-family units
((sfl50 + sfm50+ mf)/3) from Questions 20a, 20b, and 20c);
(4) application for subdivision approval and issuance of a building permit for
development of less than 50 single-family units, 50 or more single-family units, and
multi-family units ((subsfl50 + subsfm50 + submf)/3) from Questions 22a, 22b, and
22c).
We then take the average of these four numbers to arrive at the number of months involved in the
Approval Delay Index (ADI). More specifically,
(12) ADI= {((sfprojrev + mfprojrev)/2) + ((nsfprojrev + nmfprojrev)/2) +
((sfl50 + sfm50 + mf)/3) + ((subsfl50 + subsfm50 + submf)/3)}/4.
This average across such a wide range of potential projects is used because we believe it helps
reduce potential measurement error in this variable.

II.B. Creating the Aggregate Index (WRLURI2018)
Factor analysis is used to create the Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index.
Specifically, we select the first factor from each subindex to create an aggregate WRLURI2018
value for each jurisdiction.9 As with the previous Wharton index, we employ this methodology
to construct a single measure by which localities can be ranked based on the restrictiveness of
their regulatory environments. We also standardize the WRLURI2018 measure such that the
sample mean is 0 and its standard deviation is 1, with lower (higher) values of the index
reflecting a less (more) restrictive regulatory regime in the community.
Table 1 shows the weights, or factor loadings, of each subindex in the aggregate index, as
well as the correlation with the aggregate index.10 Note that the Court Involvement Index, State
Political Involvement Index, and Local Political Involvement Index have the highest factor
loadings and almost the same strong correlation with the aggregate index, while the Density
Restriction Index and Supply Restriction Index have the lowest factor loadings and weakest
correlations with WRLURI18. This indicates that there is relatively high variation across
communities in the different political and court involvement indexes, but not as much in the
supply and density restriction measures. That implies the former set of subindexes are more
influential in determining rankings of communities in terms of overall restrictiveness, but it does
not mean they necessarily are the most influential in determining the absolute level of
restrictiveness in a community.